I am demanding. If you are working with
me, there's this trust element. I'm
going to be very fair, very transparent.
You won't be wondering what Tufan is
thinking about me because I will tell
you. And you won't like everything I
tell you because I want you to improve.
I'm Francine Lacqua, and this is
Leaders, the podcast that explores what
drives the world's most influential
people. Be sure to follow and subscribe
now so you never miss an episode. This
week I'm speaking to Tufan Erginbilgic,
the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, the
aerospace and defense company.
Historically a jewel of British
industry, when Erginbilgic took over in
2023, it was on shaky ground. It had
underperformed for over a decade and
been battered by the COVID pandemic
[music]
with shares down almost 70% during his
predecessor's time.
>> [music]
>> Now, since taking over, Erginbilgic has
set in motion a dramatic restructuring
defined by thousands of job cuts,
contract renegotiations, and widespread
culture change.
For the company, all of that pain has
paid off. His tenure was described by
McKinsey as a case study in the art of
corporate transformation. I wanted to
know what gave him the confidence to
institute such radical change, how he
actually did it, and whether he sees
himself as a standard-bearer for British
industry.
Tufan, thank you so much for joining us.
Great to be here. Now, you took over
Rolls-Royce in January of 2023, and
quickly you made waves with a speech,
right? Where you talk about a burning
platform that, you know, every
investment we make, we destroy value.
Why did you decide to be so tough?
Um,
I'm not sure I was tough, actually. That
speech itself actually
was 1 and 1/2 hour speech, but obviously
headlines took from the first 10
minutes. You said January 23rd, I I took
the job, but actually I planned that
speech
starting from September 22nd.
I commission an external benchmarking
because what do you want to do in that?
is really put a put the mirror up for
the organization. You cannot say the
things you just said
without data
because
it will just land like you are
criticizing them. Effectively, with data
I demonstrated where the company is.
But, in the same speech, then you
continue
and you talk about your vision and where
you take the company. First of all, was
there a decision to give to give the
company and the employees tough love?
Neither of them, actually. Interesting,
because I don't think that way. First of
all, they need to understand where the
company is. Secondly, they need to
understand this is going to be different
because
before that, everybody was asking me,
"Oh, Rolls-Royce restructured many
times. Why it is different?" First of
all, it it was never this restructuring.
It was transformation, but that wasn't
the tough love or this. It was about
tell it how it is. Yeah.
Bring your style. Be I you are going to
be very clear,
but very straightforward.
You won't dance around the subject. You
cannot miss what I say, okay? So,
January 2023, what do you walk into?
What company do you find?
I mean,
lots of strengths on the one hand, like
good people, but on the other hand,
all those good people have not been led
well. Direction is not clear. Strategy
doesn't exist.
Performance management doesn't exist.
And the company's balance sheet is in a
terrible shape. And yes, I said we
destroy value every investment we make
because company's cost of capital was
significantly higher than returns of the
company. You said there were good people
at Rolls-Royce, but you also laid off a
lot of people, thousands of people. So,
was it difficult to to make sure that
you weren't letting go of the people
that you needed?
Yeah, I mean there's always that risk,
right? But you manage this process
really tightly so that that doesn't
happen or if it happens really on the
edges. Why I did it, frankly, we
eliminated layers in the organization.
So, if you actually look what we did,
no operational people left. When you are
doing these restructurings, people
obviously you make stuff because people
it's about people's lives.
But I always worry about if we don't do
that,
probably 50,000 people's lives will be
affected
because company will go to bad places.
So, there is always that risk, but in
this actually we had very little of
that. We were able to keep
sort of who we wanted to keep. How
important was it that that first town
hall
people got to know you and got your
style? I mean
all over the you need to be very
authentic and so that
actually when they look at you, they
say, "Okay, I believe it." Because
remember, you are not only talking about
burning platform, you are talking about
vision and how we are going to get
there. Vision
needs to be energizing. By talking so
openly, did you ever think, "I'm going
to, you know, make the people before me
really mad?"
Yes, but remember this was supposed to
be internal tunnel, right?
So,
it wasn't press conference and
therefore, yes, there was that risk it
it may leak,
but upside
was a lot bigger for me. Some
shareholders at the time were worried
that it'd be destabilizing for staff.
Yes. What did you tell Did they call
you? Uh
no, but I've been talking to
shareholders. Frankly, they have been
deeply frustrated. One banker, he said,
"Can I actually summarize
what they said with one word?" I said,
"Go ahead."
He said, "Frustration." But it's also
perception because you've been almost
criticized, right, by some people that
are close to you in the press by saying
you are tough, your style is quite
harsh. I mean, someone even said you're
a nightmare to work with.
I mean, does that hurt you? I am
demanding.
We sort of if you are if you are working
with me,
there's this trust element. I'm going to
be very fair, very transparent. You
won't be wondering
what Tu Fun is thinking about me because
I will tell you and you won't like
everything I tell you because I want you
to improve.
Uh but I will also tell you what you are
doing well. Some people love it,
excel in it because that pace and
intensity
is for a purpose. You choose where you
are where it matters. Now that you've
seen results at Rolls-Royce, Yeah. have
you [clears throat] eased off? People I
mean, you talk about a kind of cadence,
right, a rhythm
to applying pressure. So, I don't know
what ease off means because
you almost move to new normals. And
expectations are different.
Performance culture is different. I now
watch the team because we always have
and currently we are dealing with
another one.
Uh
Ah, team is behaving very differently.
So, then
you don't need to push. Actually, I I
had couple of conversations this morning
to say, "Perfect. The way you are
thinking is great."
So, in that sense, it is
easing off.
But actually, company moves to new
normal. The Rolls-Royce restructure,
which Ergin Bilgic likes to call a
transformation, brought [music] the
company back from the brink. And now
it's doing quite well. Since taking
over, Rolls-Royce's shares have
increased by more than 10 times. But how
did he actually transform the company?
And how did previous career experiences
inform his thinking? At some point,
you're you're you're basically in the
running to become chief executive of BP.
And you don't get it. So, you have to
make a decision on whether you stay or
you leave. That's correct.
>> a very difficult decision. Yes, I agree.
So, how did you make the decision of
leaving? Is it because you wanted to to
to be CEO?
At that point, yes.
Okay. Because you are already in CEO pro
because company had a process. They
invite you into the process. So,
because they invite you,
that means
there's a chance.
>> [laughter]
>> Exactly. So, therefore,
uh
yes.
And And given my track record, etc., I
thought I should get it.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh
but that made leaving
question also easier, frankly. Because
once you don't get it,
you now you know what you want at that
point. Uh and then sort of it was almost
natural that I left. And and
[clears throat] you go into private
equity. What did you learn in private
equity that you apply for, you know,
restructure or transformation of
companies? When you go to private
equity, given that investment committee
is the business in a way, right?
You really understand what good
investment committee is.
And why? Are they different in nature or
or how they talk?
>> a lot more
open,
a lot more blunt, not for you to fail,
for you to succeed. What they are doing
make sure
case is robust. So, it's like a stress
test.
>> Exactly. So,
then
frankly, I took that to our investment
committee in Rolls-Royce. And I told the
team, we are not doing this for anybody
to fail.
Because if if I actually see in the
pre-read
a an investment proposal
that will never fly,
I call the person and I say,
let's take it out of investment
committee because I don't want them to
be embarrassed. How did you transform
Rolls-Royce? It was very clear, you talk
about being blunt.
Like quickly can you say what the what
those steps were?
Francine, you are using blunt. I'm not
sure I'm authentic. Authentic.
>> [laughter]
>> I think put the mirror, but I think
I never had that
>> is not a bad word. I mean, maybe we've
made it a a bad word, right? But blunt
means you know what you get. Instead of
dancing around.
>> Yeah, that's true. I never
actually thought about time frame
in transformations, but I said to people
in the first two three years of
sort of we need to make good progress.
And normally you do. But I think four
pillars were important, really. They
this
So the first pillar is all about people.
It is the leadership vision engagement.
And second [snorts] pillar is very
granular strategy. And everybody knows
in the company their role in delivering
strategy.
If you don't have granular strategy,
only 10 people know it.
And then 10 people are surprisingly
surprised that that strategy is not
delivered. I don't have a role. How am I
going to contribute? And then everybody
has a role. Because in big
organizations, you come and go. Nobody
tells you you matter.
Somebody tells you you matter in
Rolls-Royce's transformation. And this
is your role if you deliver this. It's
very energizing.
>> But I mean, you also famously said, "I
don't do strategy in a dark room with
consultants." I personally attended 25
30 workshops when we were developing
strategy.
So
>> [snorts]
>> every like 500 plus people joined. When
you are done,
whole organization is aligned.
Because they were in the room when you
were making the decision. I go in those
workshops,
I
I say two things. There's no hierarchy
in the room. Second thing I say,
"This is going to be chaotic." Why
chaotic? Because many strategic
conversations
don't open up. It closes. It becomes
like planned conversations.
You need to open it up so that all the
out-of-blue ideas
come into the room. Even if you don't do
them, they are in the room. Do you find
one of the other things when you when
you were transforming,
right, what was key was also
renegotiating some of the contracts? I
This is How did you do that?
>> I needed to negotiate them because
company was bleeding. One thing I didn't
appreciate the cultural impact of that.
Because I went and did that
and everybody thought that was absolute
impossible thing to do.
Then people said, "I'm going to do
impossible things as well."
But do you find what happened Do you
call the phone and say, "Look, we had a
contract, but Let me go I mean,
most of the meetings
different people but play out in the
same. So, unfortunately,
that was the time I needed to go into
action quickly. So, there was no
relationship building, frankly, because
most of the time this was my first
meeting with the person. And numbers are
so big that CEO-to-CEO conversation
required, right? So, normally, how it
happened, first half an hour, they
complain new CEO, they complain about
all the operational problems we cause.
Then I'm thinking, "Well, how am I going
to now, in this, open up that actually
we are not happy with commercials?" But
it gave me a little opportunity to say,
"Yeah, I understand all your concerns,
but
we, Rolls-Royce, can only do that.
Strong Rolls-Royce actually can be a lot
better partner. And then I link that to
saying effectively
our contract doesn't work. In the first
meeting
all you want to achieve
for them to agree to bring the teams
together
to rebalance the contract and find
win-win solutions.
That's all. If you are planning to
achieve more than that, you are going to
be disappointed. British industry has
been described as being in constant
decline with factors like rising energy
costs posing challenges to making money.
Rolls-Royce's turnaround has been seen
as a positive sign for the wider
industry. So, is there anything that
Rolls-Royce's peers can learn from its
strategy? [music]
Tufan, you brought Rolls-Royce, right, a
a British heritage brand back from the
brink. I mean, do you feel sometimes
like you're carrying the weight of
British industry?
Because you've made it a success? I mean
yes, sometimes. Because I think there's
this discussions
whether companies should move to the US
market. I'm sure France and you ask
those questions. So
actually demonstrating that you can be
in this market and frankly, after a
point
it is never about about you.
You don't want to fail
all the stakeholders.
Employees, investors, even government.
Once you pass a stage right? Okay, you
have a success. Now
make sure that is sustainable success
and actually you can build on it. What
can other British companies learn from
Rolls-Royce? I mean
a lot, but
business model level, are they
are they actually set up to win?
If not,
fix the business model.
And you do that,
then of course you need to energize your
employees.
It's not about you. It is about 50,000
people. I am non-compromising for that.
You may say blunt or whatever, but
non-compromising.
Mediocrity at that level kills the
organizations,
but also good people, then you need to
develop them and have a great career in
this.
>> How do you manage good people? What do
they want? Effectively, you want
people in your organization
who are highly marketable, but they want
to stay with you. Right? [laughter]
Right. So, that's what you want.
>> sauce. Exactly. That's what you want,
right? That is almost 360
performance management in my mind.
And 360 performance management always
if you want to close the circle, it
finishes with reward and recognition.
And then grow the company
because that creates all sorts of career
opportunities. Shrinking companies, you
have less opportunities. Growing the
company,
that actually feeds itself. Right. I
mean, every time I see you, we speak
about small nuclear reactors. Yes.
>> Because it's because you you it's not a
360 view, it's a very granular it's
almost problem-solving.
It's engineering. I always go to big
picture before I come to small picture.
Europe cannot do without it.
World needs it for net zero.
Frankly, Europe needs it for supply
security, full stop.
And because
even before geopolitics,
Europe needed that. After some
geopolitical events, frankly, Europe
needs it more than that. So,
therefore, SMRs make sense
at big picture because they are less
risky because smaller plants and
manufacturing activity.
Nuclear industry has a bad sort of
experience with projects.
They take longer, much more expensive.
SMR 85% manufacturing process.
You learn.
You learn and it is modular, it is
standard rather than every nuclear
project bespoke EPC project in a way.
Right? Anything could happen in in the
world of politics, as we've seen. Yes.
Right. How How do you deal with
politics, with events outside your
events, and even here you could see a
change in government with reform coming
into power?
>> Yeah. I have a principle in business. I
I always tell people, be once you get
into trouble, it is too late.
So, you need to prepare the company
before you get into trouble. So, what
does that mean? Like we are actually
living with it as we speak and and we
last year we live with tariff. But first
of all,
make the company very resilient. That
was our drive, we did that. So, external
shocks, we we actually deal with it a
lot better. Mindset is more important
than anything else. You need to have the
mindset and the response capability in
the company.
>> [snorts]
>> You need to develop that before you are
in trouble because it takes some time.
Right?
And then you need to be agile using that
capability.
And then last thing you are going to do,
you are going to be action-oriented, not
explanation-oriented.
But if you don't know what the trouble
is,
are you scenario planning for all the
things that that could change?
>> it's not about actually predicting the
world. It is about
how your company now thinks about
dealing with
external shocks, right? So,
that is the capability, the processes,
the mindset.
Like
we [snorts] are now responding to
current shocks. I can assure you
we couldn't do half of what we are doing
3 years ago. Probably 10%. Probably when
I said something, people would look at
me with blank eyes, what is he talking
about? Today, I don't need to say a lot.
I need to give the context and people
are in action.
Are you ready for rapid-fire questions?
Yes. There are always reports that that,
you know, someone could be retiring,
including you.
If you were to retire, where would your
dream retirement destination be? I'm not
sure I want one
>> [music]
>> destination. I would like to multiple
places. One probably is a sort of a sort
of a little bit sunny place. I love
London.
I will retire in London, definitely, but
with some summer sort of sunny place in
the backup.
>> But no plans to retire?
Not anytime soon. You said you were a
university lecturer. If you were to go
back, what subject would you like
[music] to teach? Probably I would teach
more leadership-related
stuff right now. I was teaching at that
time micro and macroeconomics, but uh
a a but given my career, I think I would
do something different.
>> We've heard you're a keen reader. So, is
there one book you've returned to
multiple times?
So, I read history books. Why history
books?
Uh because that tells a lot about human
behavior to me.
Because yes, times change.
I'm not sure human behavior change a
lot. Too fun. Thank you so much. Thank
you.